---
layout: post
title:  "GUI – Do you really have to change it?"
date:   2012-01-24
categories: gui
tags: [GUI, UX, change]
---

_What happens when the average user doesn't know you're going to change the UI._

Few weeks ago I witnessed my father's reaction to a (not massive) change of graphical user interface (<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphical_user_interface">GUI, look it up on Wikipedia</a>) on his bank's website.

I can't deny some amusement when he burst out yelling at the laptop screen _‘It's not there anymore!'_, he didn't say anything else, but I could also read on his face _‘How does it work now?'_.

Then he turned to me and asked _‘Where is it?'_ like I would know, just because I'm a web designer, we are not even with the same bank!
_‘Dad, I'm sure that If you look closely you'll find it, unless they removed it, which would be weird'_. The last bit was said in a sarcastic tone of voice.
_‘I think they removed it'_ was my dad's answer.

My dad is not a web savvy person, nor he is a frequent internet surfer, but that's why this involuntary test looked immediately interesting to me: he is a typical, average user facing a non-expected GUI change.

After a bit of ranting my dad found his way to the account summary, but was not happy or interested, not even a tiny bit, in the new graphic version of the website, more elegant and slick.

<h2>First lesson learnt:</h2>
Don't change the GUI without notice.

<h2>Second lesson learnt:</h2>
Don't expect the user to notice the wonderful work you have done.

We know the majority of people is resistant to change, but change is healthy and necessary.

<h2>Few things you can do when you change a GUI:</h2>
* Tell users in advance.
* It's a good time for a newsletter, put a banner on your homepage, publish a short news statement, let them know when and how much it will change, they want to know if and how they will be affected.
* Use tooltips for fundamental areas (like your login box!) for the first few days. Let the user get used to it and ease the change in.
* Personally I believe that if you change your homepage, the rest of the website should follow...